<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//KDE//DTD DocBook XML V4.5-Based Variant V1.1//EN"
 "dtd/kdedbx45.dtd" [
<!ENTITY % English "INCLUDE">
<!ENTITY % addindex "IGNORE">
<!ENTITY Ahmad.Samir '<personname><firstname>Ahmad</firstname><surname>Samir</surname></personname>'>
<!ENTITY Ahmad.Samir.mail '<email>a.samirh78@gmail.com</email>'>
<!ENTITY konsolai '<application>Konsolai</application>'>
]>

<book id="konsolai" lang="&language;">

<bookinfo>
<title>The &konsolai; Handbook</title>
<authorgroup>
<author><personname><firstname>Struktured</firstname><surname>Labs</surname></personname>
<email>info@struktured.io</email></author>
<author>&Jonathan.Singer; &Jonathan.Singer.mail;</author>
<author>&Kurt.Hindenburg; &Kurt.Hindenburg.mail;</author>
<author>&Ahmad.Samir; &Ahmad.Samir.mail;</author>

<othercredit role="developer">
&Robert.Knight; &Robert.Knight.mail;
</othercredit>

<othercredit role="developer">
&Kurt.Hindenburg; &Kurt.Hindenburg.mail;
</othercredit>

<!-- TRANS:ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS -->

</authorgroup>

<copyright>
<year>2025</year><year>2026</year>
<holder>Struktured Labs</holder>
</copyright>

<copyright>
<year>2000</year><year>2001</year><year>2002</year>
<holder>&Jonathan.Singer;</holder>
</copyright>
<copyright>
    <year>2005</year><year>2008</year><year>2009</year><year>2010</year><year>2011</year><year>2014</year><year>2016</year><year>2017</year><year>2018</year><year>2020</year><year>2021</year>
<holder>&Kurt.Hindenburg;</holder>
</copyright>

<copyright>
    <year>2018</year>
<holder>&Ahmad.Samir;</holder>
</copyright>

<legalnotice>&FDLNotice;</legalnotice>

<date>2026-03-08</date>
<releaseinfo>&konsolai; 1.0</releaseinfo>

<abstract><para>&konsolai; is a Claude-native terminal emulator built on &konsole;.
It integrates Claude Code directly into each terminal tab, with tmux-backed session
persistence, automatic permission handling (yolo modes), token and cost tracking,
a hooks system for bidirectional communication, notifications, budgets, and a
session manager for orchestrating multiple Claude agents.</para></abstract>

<keywordset>
<keyword>KDE</keyword>
<keyword>konsolai</keyword>
<keyword>konsole</keyword>
<keyword>claude</keyword>
<keyword>terminal</keyword>
<keyword>ai</keyword>
<keyword>cli</keyword>
<keyword>tmux</keyword>
<keyword>agent</keyword>
</keywordset>

</bookinfo>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 1 — Introduction                                                 -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="introduction">
<title>Introduction</title>

<sect1 id="what-is-konsolai">
<title>What is &konsolai;?</title>

<para>&konsolai; is a fork of &konsole;, the &kde; terminal emulator, extended with
deep integration of
<ulink url="https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code">Claude Code</ulink>,
Anthropic's CLI-based AI coding assistant.  Every terminal tab in &konsolai; runs
its own Claude Code session inside a dedicated <application>tmux</application> session,
providing persistent AI-assisted development that survives application restarts.</para>

<para>Key capabilities beyond a standard terminal:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Claude Code in every tab</emphasis> &mdash; Each tab
starts a Claude Code session automatically, backed by tmux for
persistence.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Three-level auto-approval (Yolo Modes)</emphasis> &mdash;
Progressively automate permission approvals, suggestion acceptance, and
autonomous continuation.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Session persistence</emphasis> &mdash; Close tabs, close
the app, reboot your machine &mdash; your Claude sessions keep running in tmux and
can be reattached.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Token and cost tracking</emphasis> &mdash; Real-time
display of token usage and estimated cost in the status bar.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Notification system</emphasis> &mdash; Audio, desktop,
system tray, and in-terminal notifications for state changes.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Budget enforcement</emphasis> &mdash; Set time, cost,
and token limits per session with soft and hard policies.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Session manager</emphasis> &mdash; Sidebar panel for
managing all active, detached, archived, and discovered sessions.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Hooks system</emphasis> &mdash; Bidirectional
communication between Claude Code and &konsolai; via Unix domain
sockets.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Subagent tracking</emphasis> &mdash; Monitor spawned
sub-agents and background processes in real time.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Remote SSH sessions</emphasis> &mdash; Run Claude Code
on remote hosts over SSH, with full tmux integration.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>&konsolai; retains all the features of &konsole; &mdash; profiles, split
views, bookmarks, keyboard selection, semantic shell integration, and
more.</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="requirements">
<title>Requirements</title>

<para>To use &konsolai;'s Claude integration features you need:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><application>tmux</application> installed and in your
<envar>PATH</envar>.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>The <command>claude</command> CLI (Claude Code) installed and
authenticated.  See the
<ulink url="https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code">Claude Code
documentation</ulink> for setup instructions.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>An active Anthropic API key or Claude Max subscription.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>Without these, &konsolai; still functions as a full-featured terminal
emulator (identical to &konsole;), but Claude-specific features will be
unavailable.</para>
</sect1>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 2 — Getting Started                                              -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="getting-started">
<title>Getting Started</title>

<sect1 id="first-session">
<title>Your First Claude Session</title>

<para>When you open a new tab in &konsolai;, a Claude Code session starts
automatically.  Behind the scenes &konsolai;:</para>

<orderedlist>
<listitem><para>Creates (or reattaches to) a <application>tmux</application>
session named
<literal>konsolai-<replaceable>workspace</replaceable>-<replaceable>profile</replaceable>-<replaceable>id</replaceable></literal>,
where <replaceable>id</replaceable> is an 8-character hex identifier.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Launches <command>claude</command> inside that tmux
session.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Installs hooks so Claude can communicate events (permissions,
tool use, state changes) back to &konsolai; through a Unix domain
socket.</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para>You can immediately start typing prompts to Claude.  The tab bar shows a
colored indicator dot for each session reflecting its current state.</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="tab-indicators">
<title>Tab State Indicators</title>

<para>Each tab in &konsolai; shows a small colored dot to the left of the tab
title.  The colors indicate the Claude session state:</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Gray (&#x25CB;)</term>
<listitem><para>Not running &mdash; Claude has not started or has
exited.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Green (&#x25CF;)</term>
<listitem><para>Idle &mdash; Claude is ready and waiting for
input.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Spinning blue (&#x25C9;)</term>
<listitem><para>Working &mdash; Claude is actively processing a
request.  The indicator animates to show activity.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Orange (&#x25CF;)</term>
<listitem><para>Waiting for input &mdash; Claude is showing a permission
prompt and needs approval or denial.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Red (&#x25CF;)</term>
<listitem><para>Error &mdash; An error has occurred in the Claude
session.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="status-bar">
<title>The Status Bar</title>

<para>The status bar at the bottom of the &konsolai; window displays:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>State indicator</emphasis> &mdash; An animated
spinner (using Braille characters: &#x280B; &#x2819; &#x2839; &#x2838;
&#x283C; &#x2834; &#x2826; &#x2827; &#x2807; &#x280F;) with
color-coded state text (gray/green/blue/orange/red).</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Current task</emphasis> &mdash; A brief description of
what Claude is currently working on.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Cost display</emphasis> &mdash; Weekly and monthly
spend estimates.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="session-wizard">
<title>The Session Wizard</title>

<para>For more control over new sessions, use the Session Wizard
(<menuchoice><guimenu>File</guimenu><guimenuitem>New Claude
Session...</guimenuitem></menuchoice>).  The wizard provides:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Task prompt</emphasis> &mdash; Describe what you want
Claude to work on.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Folder name</emphasis> &mdash; Auto-inferred from your
prompt, with a browse button for manual selection.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Git options</emphasis> &mdash; Choose how to set up
version control: None, Init new repo, Git Worktree from existing repo, or
use the current branch.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Model selection</emphasis> &mdash; Choose from Default,
Opus, Sonnet, or Haiku.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Resume conversation</emphasis> &mdash; Pick up where a
previous session left off.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect1>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 3 — Claude Integration                                           -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="claude-integration">
<title>Claude Integration</title>

<sect1 id="claude-menu">
<title>The Claude Menu</title>

<para>The <guimenu>Claude</guimenu> menu in the menu bar provides all
Claude-specific actions:</para>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>A</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
<guimenuitem>Approve Permission</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Approve a pending permission request from Claude.  Equivalent
to selecting <guilabel>Yes</guilabel> or <guilabel>Allow</guilabel> in the
Claude CLI permission prompt.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>D</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
<guimenuitem>Deny Permission</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Deny a pending permission request.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>X</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
<guimenuitem>Stop Claude</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Send an interrupt signal to stop the current Claude
operation.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><menuchoice>
<shortcut><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>R</keycap></keycombo></shortcut>
<guimenuitem>Restart Claude</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice></term>
<listitem><para>Restart the Claude session in the current tab.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Yolo Mode (Auto-Approve)</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Toggle yolo mode. See <xref linkend="claude-yolo"/>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Double Yolo Mode (Auto-Complete)</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Toggle double yolo mode. See <xref linkend="claude-yolo"/>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Triple Yolo Mode (Auto-Continue)</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Toggle triple yolo mode. See <xref linkend="claude-yolo"/>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Set Auto-Continue Prompt...</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Configure the prompt used by triple yolo mode. See
<xref linkend="claude-autocontinue"/>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Detach Session</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Detach from the tmux session without killing it. Claude
continues running in the background and can be reattached
later.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Kill Session</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Kill the tmux session completely, terminating the Claude
process.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Reattach Session</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Shows a submenu of orphaned tmux sessions from previous
&konsolai; runs that can be reattached.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Archive All / Archive Session</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Kill the tmux session(s) but preserve metadata for later
restoration.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guisubmenu>Configure Notifications</guisubmenu></term>
<listitem><para>Submenu to toggle notification channels:
<guimenuitem>Sound Alert</guimenuitem>,
<guimenuitem>Desktop Notification</guimenuitem>,
<guimenuitem>System Tray</guimenuitem>,
<guimenuitem>In-Terminal Visual</guimenuitem>, and
<guimenuitem>Yolo Approval Notifications</guimenuitem>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><guimenuitem>Configure Hooks...</guimenuitem></term>
<listitem><para>Open the hooks configuration dialog. See
<xref linkend="claude-hooks"/>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== YOLO MODES ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-yolo">
<title>Yolo Modes</title>

<para>&konsolai; provides three escalating levels of automation for
interacting with Claude.  Each level includes the behavior of the
levels below it.  All yolo mode settings are persisted per-session and
restored when a session is reattached.</para>

<sect2 id="yolo-level1">
<title>Level 1: Yolo Mode (Auto-Approve Permissions)</title>

<para>When enabled, &konsolai; automatically approves every permission
request from Claude.  This is equivalent to selecting <guilabel>Always
allow</guilabel> for each tool use prompt.</para>

<para>Two independent approval mechanisms work in parallel:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Hook-based (primary)</emphasis> &mdash; The
<command>konsolai-hook-handler</command> binary checks for a
<filename>.yolo</filename> marker file and outputs an approval JSON
response before the prompt is even displayed in the terminal.  This is
instant and does not require any terminal interaction.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Polling-based (fallback)</emphasis> &mdash; Every
300 ms, &konsolai; captures the bottom lines of the terminal and checks for
permission prompt patterns (the <literal>&#x276F;</literal> character
together with <literal>Yes</literal> or <literal>Allow</literal> on the
same line).  If detected, it navigates the TUI to select
<guilabel>Always allow</guilabel>.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>Both mechanisms are always active when yolo mode is on, ensuring
reliability even if hooks fail (stale sockets, handler crash,
etc.).</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="yolo-level2">
<title>Level 2: Double Yolo Mode (Auto-Accept Suggestions)</title>
<para>In addition to auto-approving permissions, double yolo mode
automatically accepts tab-completion suggestions from Claude by sending
<keycap>Tab</keycap> followed by <keycap>Enter</keycap> when Claude
becomes idle.</para>
<para>The <guilabel>Try Suggestions First</guilabel> setting (enabled by
default) causes double yolo to fire before triple yolo, giving Claude's
own suggestions priority over the auto-continue prompt.  There is a 5-second
delay before suggestion acceptance fires.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="yolo-level3">
<title>Level 3: Triple Yolo Mode (Auto-Continue)</title>
<para>Triple yolo automatically sends a configurable prompt whenever Claude
becomes idle and stays idle.  This creates a fully autonomous loop where Claude
continuously works on tasks without waiting for user input.</para>

<para>Idle detection uses two methods:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Hook-based (primary)</emphasis> &mdash; The
<literal>Stop</literal> hook event signals that Claude has finished
responding.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Polling (fallback)</emphasis> &mdash; Every
2 seconds, checks the terminal output for prompt indicators
(<literal>&gt;</literal> at the end of output).  Permission prompts are
explicitly excluded to avoid conflicts with yolo
mode.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>If double yolo fires a suggestion but Claude remains idle, triple
yolo follows after a 2-second fallback delay.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="yolo-approval-tracking">
<title>Approval Tracking</title>
<para>Every auto-approval is logged with a timestamp, the tool name, which
yolo level triggered it, token count, and estimated cost.  The log is
capped at 500 entries per session to bound memory usage.  You can view the
approval log by right-clicking a session in the Session Manager and
selecting <guimenuitem>View Approval Log</guimenuitem>.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== AUTO-CONTINUE PROMPT ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-autocontinue">
<title>Auto-Continue Prompt</title>

<para>The auto-continue prompt is the text sent to Claude when triple yolo
mode detects an idle state.  The default prompt is:</para>

<blockquote><para><literal>Continue improving, debugging, fixing, adding
features, or introducing tests where applicable.</literal></para></blockquote>

<para>You can customize this prompt at two levels:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Per-session</emphasis> &mdash; Use
<menuchoice><guimenu>Claude</guimenu><guimenuitem>Set Auto-Continue
Prompt...</guimenuitem></menuchoice> to set a prompt for the current
session only.  The per-session prompt is persisted in the session registry
and restored when the session is reattached.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Global default</emphasis> &mdash; Open
<menuchoice><guimenu>Settings</guimenu><guimenuitem>Configure
&konsolai;...</guimenuitem></menuchoice> to set the default prompt used
by all new sessions.  A per-session prompt takes precedence over the
global default.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>When a session is created, &konsolai; checks the session registry for
a previously used prompt matching the same working directory and restores
it automatically.</para>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== SESSION PERSISTENCE ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-session-persistence">
<title>Session Persistence</title>

<para>Each Claude Code session runs inside a <application>tmux</application>
session, which provides robust persistence:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Closing a tab</emphasis> detaches from the tmux
session but does not kill it.  Claude continues working in the
background.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Closing &konsolai;</emphasis> entirely leaves all
tmux sessions running.  On next launch, orphaned sessions appear in the
<guimenu>Claude</guimenu> &gt; <guimenuitem>Reattach
Session</guimenuitem> submenu and in the Session Manager
panel.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Session state</emphasis> (yolo modes,
auto-continue prompt, working directory, profile, approval counts) is
persisted to
<filename>~/.local/share/konsolai/sessions.json</filename>.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>The session registry tracks the following for each session:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Session name and unique 8-character hex ID</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Profile name and working directory</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Claude model in use</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>All three yolo mode settings</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Auto-continue prompt text</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Attachment status and timestamps</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>SSH connection details (for remote sessions)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Resume conversation ID</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>The registry is refreshed every 30 seconds to detect new or terminated
tmux sessions.</para>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== RESUME CONVERSATIONS ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-resume">
<title>Resuming Conversations</title>

<para>&konsolai; can resume previous Claude conversations, picking up exactly
where you left off.  When creating a new session via the Session Wizard, you
can select a previous conversation from a list showing:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Conversation summary</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Message count</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Last modified date</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>Select <guilabel>Start Fresh</guilabel> to begin a new conversation
instead.  The resume feature discovers conversations across all project paths
associated with the working directory.</para>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== TOKEN TRACKING ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-token-tracking">
<title>Token and Cost Tracking</title>

<para>&konsolai; tracks token usage per session and displays estimated cost
in the status bar.  Token data is read incrementally from Claude CLI
conversation JSONL files at
<filename>~/.claude/projects/<replaceable>hashed-path</replaceable>/*.jsonl</filename>.</para>

<para>The following token categories are tracked:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Input tokens</emphasis> &mdash; Tokens sent to
Claude ($3.00 per million for Opus).</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Output tokens</emphasis> &mdash; Tokens generated
by Claude ($15.00 per million for Opus).</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Cache creation tokens</emphasis> &mdash; Tokens used
to create prompt cache entries ($0.30 per million).</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Cache read tokens</emphasis> &mdash; Tokens read
from prompt cache ($0.30 per million).</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>The token display refreshes every 30 seconds and on Claude state
changes.  The compact format shows input and output token counts as
<literal><replaceable>X</replaceable>&#x2191;
<replaceable>Y</replaceable>&#x2193;</literal>.</para>

<para>Context window usage is also tracked: &konsolai; detects the model in
use and shows what percentage of the context window has been consumed.
Opus 4 and Sonnet 4 models have a 1M token context window; other models
default to 200K.</para>

<sect2 id="resource-usage">
<title>Resource Usage</title>
<para>On Linux, &konsolai; also monitors the Claude process's CPU and memory
usage via <filename>/proc</filename>.  This is displayed in compact format
(e.g., <literal>67% 1.1G</literal>) alongside the token information.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== BUDGET CONTROLLER ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-budget">
<title>Budget Controller</title>

<para>The budget controller lets you set limits on three dimensions for each
session:</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Time limit</term>
<listitem><para>Maximum session duration in minutes.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Cost ceiling</term>
<listitem><para>Maximum estimated cost in USD.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Token ceiling</term>
<listitem><para>Maximum total tokens consumed.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

<para>Each dimension can have one of two policies:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Soft</emphasis> (default) &mdash; Emit a warning
at 80% of the limit but allow the session to continue.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Hard</emphasis> &mdash; Automatically stop the
session and block yolo mode when the limit is reached.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== NOTIFICATIONS ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-notifications">
<title>Notification System</title>

<para>&konsolai; provides four notification channels, each independently
toggleable:</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Sound Alert</term>
<listitem><para>Plays custom WAV audio files on a dedicated thread to avoid
blocking the UI.  Volume is configurable from 0.0 to
1.0.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Desktop Notification</term>
<listitem><para>Standard KDE desktop popup notifications via the
<classname>KNotification</classname> framework.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>System Tray</term>
<listitem><para>A <classname>KStatusNotifierItem</classname> in the system
tray that changes color to reflect the current session
state.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>In-Terminal Visual</term>
<listitem><para>An overlay widget on the terminal display that fades in and
out.  Useful when the terminal is visible but you are working in another
window.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

<para>Notification types are color-coded:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Blue &mdash; Informational</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Green &mdash; Task complete</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Yellow &mdash; Waiting for input</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Orange &mdash; Permission request</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Red &mdash; Error</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>Yolo approval notifications are available but disabled by default.  When
enabled, a cooldown mechanism prevents notification spam during rapid
auto-approval sequences.</para>

<para>Configure notifications from the
<menuchoice><guimenu>Claude</guimenu><guisubmenu>Configure
Notifications</guisubmenu></menuchoice> submenu.</para>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== HOOKS SYSTEM ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-hooks">
<title>Hooks System</title>

<para>&konsolai; uses a hooks system based on Unix domain sockets for
bidirectional communication with Claude Code.  Hooks are the primary
mechanism for real-time state tracking and are more reliable than terminal
output parsing.</para>

<sect2 id="hooks-architecture">
<title>Architecture</title>
<para>When a Claude session starts, &konsolai;:</para>
<orderedlist>
<listitem><para>Creates a Unix domain socket at
<filename>~/.local/share/konsolai/sessions/<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>.sock</filename>.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Generates a hooks configuration and merges it into the
project's
<filename>.claude/settings.local.json</filename>.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>The configuration instructs Claude to call the
<command>konsolai-hook-handler</command> binary for each hook
event, passing the socket path and event type as
arguments.</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para>When a session is destroyed, hooks are automatically removed from the
project settings.  A safety check prevents removing hooks if a replacement
session is already registered (handling the reattach race
condition).</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="hooks-events">
<title>Hook Events</title>
<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Stop</term>
<listitem><para>Claude finished responding.  Used to detect idle state for
double/triple yolo and to update the state indicator.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>PreToolUse</term>
<listitem><para>Claude is about to use a tool.  &konsolai; records the
subprocess start time and command for the session manager tree
view.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>PostToolUse</term>
<listitem><para>Claude finished using a tool.  Updates subprocess status to
completed or failed with exit code and output.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Notification</term>
<listitem><para>General notifications from Claude, including permission
prompts and task descriptions.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>SubagentStart / SubagentStop</term>
<listitem><para>A sub-agent was spawned or stopped.  &konsolai; tracks
agent ID, type, teammate name, and task description.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>TeammateIdle / TaskCompleted</term>
<listitem><para>Team-related events from multi-agent
workflows.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="hooks-handler">
<title>Hook Handler Binary</title>
<para>The <command>konsolai-hook-handler</command> is a lightweight binary
that:</para>
<orderedlist>
<listitem><para>Receives event data from Claude via stdin
(JSON).</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>For permission request events, checks
for a <filename>.yolo</filename> marker file and auto-approves if
present by writing approval JSON to stdout.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Connects to the &konsolai; Unix domain socket and forwards
the event for tracking and UI updates.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Always exits with code 0, even on connection failure.
A non-zero exit would break the entire Claude CLI
session.</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== SESSION MANAGER ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-session-manager">
<title>Session Manager Panel</title>

<para>The Session Manager is a sidebar panel that provides an overview of all
Claude sessions.  Sessions are organized into categories:</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Pinned</term>
<listitem><para>Sessions pinned to the top for quick access.  Pinned
sessions remain visible even when detached.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Active</term>
<listitem><para>Sessions currently attached to a &konsolai;
tab.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Closed</term>
<listitem><para>Detached but still running tmux sessions.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Archived</term>
<listitem><para>Killed sessions with preserved metadata.  These can be
unarchived to restart Claude with the same session
identity.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Discovered</term>
<listitem><para>Sessions found via project scanning that are not yet
tracked by the registry.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

<para>Active sessions in the tree view show real-time information about
sub-agents and subprocesses, grouped by the prompt round that spawned
them.  Zombie agents (no hook update for 5+ minutes) are automatically
filtered out.  Completed entries are purged after 5 minutes to prevent
unbounded growth.</para>

<para>Right-click a session for a context menu with these actions:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><guimenuitem>Attach</guimenuitem> &mdash; Reattach to a
detached session.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><guimenuitem>Pin / Unpin</guimenuitem> &mdash; Toggle
pinned status.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><guimenuitem>View Approval Log</guimenuitem> &mdash;
See a log of all auto-approvals made by yolo modes, with timestamps,
tool names, and which yolo level triggered each approval.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><guimenuitem>Archive</guimenuitem> &mdash; Kill the tmux
session but preserve its metadata.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><guimenuitem>Unarchive &amp; Start</guimenuitem> &mdash;
Restart Claude with the archived session's identity.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><guimenuitem>Delete Permanently</guimenuitem> &mdash;
Remove the session and its metadata entirely.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>Double-clicking a session attaches to it (if detached) or
unarchives it (if archived).</para>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== SUBAGENT TRACKING ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-subagents">
<title>Subagent and Subprocess Tracking</title>

<para>When Claude spawns sub-agents (via the Agent tool) or runs shell
commands, &konsolai; tracks them in real time through the hooks
system:</para>

<sect2 id="subagent-info">
<title>Sub-agents</title>
<para>For each sub-agent, &konsolai; records:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Agent ID and type (general-purpose, Explore, Plan,
etc.)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Teammate name (for multi-agent teams)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Current state (Working, Idle, Not Running)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Start time and last update timestamp</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Task description</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="subprocess-info">
<title>Subprocesses</title>
<para>For each subprocess (shell command), &konsolai; records:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Command (truncated for display, full command
available)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Status (Running, Completed, Failed)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Start/finish timestamps and exit code</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Captured output (limited to 1000 characters)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>PID and resource usage (CPU%, RSS)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Whether it is a background process</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== SESSION OBSERVER ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-observer">
<title>Session Observer (Stuck Detection)</title>

<para>The session observer monitors Claude sessions for patterns that
indicate the session is stuck, spinning, or wasting resources.  It
detects:</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Idle Loop</term>
<listitem><para>Rapid Working/Idle cycles with little
progress.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Error Loop</term>
<listitem><para>The same error repeated multiple times.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Cost Spiral</term>
<listitem><para>High token burn with no code changes.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Context Rot</term>
<listitem><para>High input tokens with shrinking output &mdash; the context
window is filling up.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Permission Storm</term>
<listitem><para>Too many permission approvals in a short
window.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Subagent Churn</term>
<listitem><para>Agents starting and stopping without completing
tasks.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

<para>When a pattern is detected, the observer can take escalating
interventions:</para>
<orderedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Notify</emphasis> &mdash; Desktop notification and
tree badge.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Pause</emphasis> &mdash; Save yolo state and disable
relevant levels.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Adjust</emphasis> &mdash; Downgrade yolo
level.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Redirect</emphasis> &mdash; Pause L3, send a
corrective prompt, then re-enable.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Restart</emphasis> &mdash; Kill the session and
create a new one with state carry-forward.</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para>The intervention policy is configurable: NotifyOnly, AutoDowngrade,
AutoRedirect (default), or FullAuto.</para>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== PROMPT QUALITY ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-prompt-quality">
<title>Prompt Quality Assessment</title>

<para>&konsolai; includes a heuristic prompt quality scorer that evaluates
prompts on a 0&ndash;100 scale before submission.  The assessment
considers:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>File path specificity &mdash; Does the prompt reference
specific files?</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Acceptance criteria clarity &mdash; Does the prompt define
what "done" looks like?</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Bounded scope &mdash; Is the task reasonably
scoped?</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Clarity and structure</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>The score maps to a grade:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Excellent</emphasis> (80&ndash;100)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Good</emphasis> (60&ndash;79)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Needs Work</emphasis> (40&ndash;59)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Too Vague</emphasis> (0&ndash;39)</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>The assessment also provides improvement suggestions, detected file
references, a suggested yolo level, and estimates for duration and
cost.</para>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== REMOTE SESSIONS ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-remote">
<title>Remote SSH Sessions</title>

<para>&konsolai; can run Claude Code on remote hosts over SSH.  When creating
a remote session, you specify:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>SSH hostname or IP address</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>SSH username</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>SSH port (default: 22)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Optionally, an existing remote tmux session to attach to
instead of creating a new one</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>The remote session wraps the tmux command inside an SSH call.  All
&konsolai; features (hooks, yolo modes, notifications) work over remote
sessions.  Hook cleanup is performed via SSH when the session is
destroyed.</para>
</sect1>

<!-- ===== D-BUS ===== -->
<sect1 id="claude-dbus">
<title>D-Bus Interface</title>

<para>&konsolai; exposes a D-Bus interface at
<literal>org.kde.konsolai.Claude</literal> for scripting and external
tool integration.</para>

<sect2 id="dbus-properties">
<title>Properties</title>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><literal>state</literal> &mdash; Current Claude
state (NotRunning, Starting, Idle, Working, WaitingInput,
Error).</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>currentTask</literal> &mdash; Description of the
current task.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>sessionName</literal> &mdash; The tmux session
name.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>sessionId</literal> &mdash; The 8-character unique
ID.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>profileName</literal> &mdash; The &konsole; profile
in use.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="dbus-methods">
<title>Methods</title>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><literal>sendPrompt(QString text)</literal> &mdash; Send a
prompt to Claude.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>approvePermission()</literal> &mdash; Approve the
current permission request.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>approvePermissionAlways()</literal> &mdash; Approve
and select "Always allow".</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>denyPermission()</literal> &mdash; Deny the current
permission request.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>stop()</literal> &mdash; Stop
Claude.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>restart()</literal> &mdash; Restart the Claude
session.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>getTranscript(int lines = 1000)</literal> &mdash;
Get the last N lines of terminal output.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect2>
</sect1>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 4 — GUI MCP Server                                               -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="gui-mcp">
<title>GUI MCP Server</title>

<para>&konsolai; ships with a GUI MCP (Model Context Protocol) server in
<filename>tools/gui-mcp/</filename> that enables Claude to introspect and
automate &konsolai;'s own user interface.  This is used for automated
testing and for enabling Claude to interact with GUI elements
programmatically.</para>

<sect1 id="mcp-tools">
<title>Available Tools</title>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>list_apps</literal></term>
<listitem><para>List all accessible applications on the
desktop.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>widget_tree</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Get the widget hierarchy of an application, with adjustable
depth.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>find_widget</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Search for a widget by role, name, or automation
ID.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>click</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Activate (click) a widget.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>type_text</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Type text into an editable widget.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>read_text</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Read text content from a widget.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>widget_state</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Get enabled/visible/checked/expanded/selected
states.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>widget_properties</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Get all accessible properties of a widget.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>select_tab</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Switch to a tab by name.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>expand_node</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Expand or collapse a tree node.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>send_keys</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Send keyboard input with special key syntax:
<literal>{Enter}</literal>, <literal>{Ctrl+c}</literal>,
<literal>{Alt+F4}</literal>,
<literal>{Shift+Tab}</literal>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><literal>screenshot</literal></term>
<listitem><para>Capture a PNG screenshot of a widget or the entire
application.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="mcp-backends">
<title>Platform Backends</title>

<para>The MCP server uses platform-specific accessibility backends:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Linux</emphasis> &mdash; AT-SPI2 via
<literal>gi.repository.Atspi</literal>.  Requires
<envar>QT_LINUX_ACCESSIBILITY_ALWAYS_ON=1</envar> to be set on the target
application.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Windows</emphasis> &mdash; UI Automation via
<literal>pywinauto</literal> (implementation in
progress).</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>Widgets are addressed using slash-separated paths from the
application root.  Qt widget <literal>objectName</literal> properties map
to automation IDs for reliable identification.</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="mcp-setup">
<title>Setup</title>

<para>To add the MCP server to Claude Code:</para>
<programlisting>claude mcp add -s local konsolai-gui -- python -m konsolai_gui_mcp.server</programlisting>
<para>This writes the configuration to <filename>~/.claude.json</filename>
and makes the 12 GUI tools available in all Claude Code
sessions.</para>
</sect1>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 5 — Terminal Features (inherited from Konsole)                    -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="terminal-features">
<title>Terminal Features</title>

<para>&konsolai; inherits all terminal features from &konsole;.  This chapter
covers the most important ones.</para>

<sect1 id="terminal">
<title>Terminal Basics</title>

<para>&konsolai; is an X/Wayland terminal emulator, often referred to as a
terminal or a shell. It emulates a command line interface in a text-only
window.</para>

<para>&konsolai; typically runs a command shell (bash, zsh, fish, etc.)
that executes commands you type.  Consult your operating system and shell
documentation for usage details.</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="scrollback">
<title>Scrollback</title>

<para>&konsolai; uses scrollback to allow users to view previously displayed
output.  By default, scrollback saves 1000 lines of output in addition to
what is currently displayed on screen.</para>

<para>Navigate scrollback with:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>The scroll bar or mouse wheel</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><keycombo action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>Page Up</keycap></keycombo>
/ <keycombo action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>Page Down</keycap></keycombo> &mdash;
scroll by page</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><keycombo action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>Up Arrow</keycap></keycombo>
/ <keycombo action="simul">&Shift;<keycap>Down Arrow</keycap></keycombo> &mdash;
scroll by line</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="selection">
<title>Selection Mode</title>
<para>&konsolai; has a keyboard selection mode.  Enter it with
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>D</keycap></keycombo>
and leave with <keycap>Esc</keycap>.</para>

<para>In this mode:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Navigate with arrow keys, PageUp/Down, Home/End</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Vi-style: h, j, k, l for movement; Ctrl+b, f, u, d for
paging</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Select with Ctrl or Shift + arrows, or press <keycap>V</keycap>
to start/end selection</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><keycombo>&Shift;<keycap>V</keycap></keycombo> selects whole
lines</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="profiles">
<title>Profiles</title>

<para>Profiles allow quick setup for common tasks.  Create profiles via
<menuchoice><guimenu>Settings</guimenu><guimenuitem>Manage
Profiles...</guimenuitem></menuchoice>.  Each profile can define a custom
command, font, color scheme, <envar>TERM</envar> type, and many other
settings.</para>

<para>All profiles are saved in
<filename>$<envar>XDG_DATA_HOME</envar>/konsole</filename>.</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="split-views">
<title>Split Views</title>

<para>Split the terminal view horizontally or vertically:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>(</keycap></keycombo>
&mdash; Split Left/Right</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>)</keycap></keycombo>
&mdash; Split Top/Bottom</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>]</keycap></keycombo>
/ <keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>[</keycap></keycombo>
&mdash; Expand/Shrink View</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>E</keycap></keycombo>
&mdash; Toggle Maximize</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="semantic-shell-integration">
<title>Semantic Shell Integration</title>

<para>When your shell emits the appropriate escape sequences, &konsolai; can
distinguish between prompt, input, and output text.  This enables:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Navigate between prompts with
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>PgUp</keycap></keycombo>
/
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>PgDown</keycap></keycombo>
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Visual hints: lines above prompts, error bars, alternating
command backgrounds</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Smart copy: <guimenuitem>Copy user input</guimenuitem>,
<guimenuitem>Copy command output</guimenuitem>,
<guimenuitem>Copy except prompt</guimenuitem></para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Click-to-position cursor in input lines</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>Set up by pressing
<keycombo>&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>]</keycap></keycombo> in a bash session, or
consult your shell's documentation for other shells.</para>
</sect1>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 6 — Keyboard Shortcuts Reference                                 -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="shortcuts">
<title>Keyboard Shortcuts</title>

<sect1 id="claude-shortcuts">
<title>Claude Shortcuts</title>

<informaltable>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Shortcut</entry>
<entry>Action</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>A</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Approve Permission</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>D</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Deny Permission</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>X</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Stop Claude</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Alt;<keycap>R</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Restart Claude</entry>
</row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>

<para>All Claude shortcuts use the <keycombo>&Ctrl;&Alt;</keycombo> modifier
prefix to avoid conflicts with both terminal applications and &konsole;'s
built-in shortcuts (which use
<keycombo>&Ctrl;&Shift;</keycombo>).</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="terminal-shortcuts">
<title>Terminal Shortcuts</title>

<informaltable>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Shortcut</entry>
<entry>Action</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>N</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>New Window</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>T</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>New Tab</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>W</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Close Session</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>Q</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Close Window</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>C</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Copy</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>V</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Paste</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>F</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Find</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>D</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Selection Mode</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>M</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Toggle Menu Bar</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>K</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Clear Scrollback and Reset</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>(</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Split View Left/Right</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>)</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Split View Top/Bottom</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>+</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Enlarge Font</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>-</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Shrink Font</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>0</keycap></keycombo></entry>
<entry>Reset Font Size</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><keycap>F11</keycap></entry>
<entry>Full Screen</entry>
</row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>

<para>All shortcuts can be customized via
<menuchoice><guimenu>Settings</guimenu><guimenuitem>Configure Keyboard
Shortcuts...</guimenuitem></menuchoice>.</para>
</sect1>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 7 — Configuration                                                -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="configuration">
<title>Configuration</title>

<sect1 id="konsolai-settings">
<title>&konsolai; Settings</title>

<para>Open the settings dialog via
<menuchoice><guimenu>Settings</guimenu><guimenuitem>Configure
&konsolai;...</guimenuitem></menuchoice>.  &konsolai;-specific settings
include:</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Project Root</term>
<listitem><para>Default workspace directory for new
sessions.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Git Remote Root</term>
<listitem><para>Base URL for git remotes
(e.g., <literal>git@github.com:username/</literal>).</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Default Model</term>
<listitem><para>Claude model to use for new sessions (Opus, Sonnet,
Haiku).</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Git Mode</term>
<listitem><para>Default version control setup: Init, Worktree,
Current Branch, or None.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Worktree Source Repo</term>
<listitem><para>Source repository for git worktree
creation.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Default Yolo Modes</term>
<listitem><para>Default yolo mode settings for new
sessions.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Auto-Continue Prompt</term>
<listitem><para>Default prompt text for triple yolo
mode.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Try Suggestions First</term>
<listitem><para>Whether double yolo fires before triple yolo (default:
yes).</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Notification Channels</term>
<listitem><para>Enable/disable each of the four notification
channels.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Audio Volume</term>
<listitem><para>Volume level for sound notifications (0.0 to
1.0).</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

<para>Settings are stored in <filename>~/.config/konsolairc</filename> via the
standard &kde; configuration system (<classname>KConfig</classname>).</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="file-locations">
<title>File Locations</title>

<informaltable>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>File</entry>
<entry>Purpose</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row>
<entry><filename>~/.config/konsolairc</filename></entry>
<entry>Application settings</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><filename>~/.local/share/konsolai/sessions.json</filename></entry>
<entry>Session registry (metadata for all sessions)</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><filename>~/.local/share/konsolai/sessions/<replaceable>id</replaceable>.sock</filename></entry>
<entry>Unix domain socket for hook communication</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><filename>~/.local/share/konsolai/sessions/<replaceable>id</replaceable>.yolo</filename></entry>
<entry>Yolo mode marker file</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><filename>~/.claude/projects/<replaceable>hash</replaceable>/*.jsonl</filename></entry>
<entry>Claude conversation files (token data source)</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><filename>.claude/settings.local.json</filename></entry>
<entry>Per-project Claude hooks configuration (managed by &konsolai;)</entry>
</row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>
</sect1>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 8 — Command-Line Options                                         -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="command-line-options">
<title>Command-line Options</title>

<para>&konsolai; accepts all standard &konsole; command-line options:</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>--help</option></term>
<listitem><para>List all available options.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>--profile</option> <parameter>name</parameter></term>
<listitem><para>Start with the specified profile instead of the
default.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>--layout</option> <parameter>file</parameter></term>
<listitem><para>Start with a saved JSON layout file.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>--workdir</option> <parameter>dir</parameter></term>
<listitem><para>Open with the specified initial working
directory.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>--hold, --noclose</option></term>
<listitem><para>Do not close the session when it ends.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>--new-tab</option></term>
<listitem><para>Open in an existing window instead of a new
one.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>--tabs-from-file</option> <parameter>file</parameter></term>
<listitem><para>Create tabs from a tab configuration file.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>--fullscreen</option></term>
<listitem><para>Start in fullscreen mode.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>--separate, --nofork</option></term>
<listitem><para>Run as a separate process.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><option>-e</option> <parameter>command</parameter></term>
<listitem><para>Execute a command instead of the normal shell.  Must be the
last option.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

<para>&konsolai; also accepts generic &Qt; and &kf6-full; options.</para>
</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 9 — Scripting                                                    -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="scripting">
<title>Scripting &konsolai;</title>

<para>&konsolai; supports scripting via &DBus;.  In addition to the standard
&konsole; D-Bus interfaces for window and session control, &konsolai; adds
the <literal>org.kde.konsolai.Claude</literal> interface described in
<xref linkend="claude-dbus"/>.</para>

<para>Use <application>qdbus</application> or
<application>qdbusviewer</application> to explore available methods:</para>

<programlisting>
# List Konsolai services
qdbus | grep konsolai

# Show Claude interface methods
qdbus org.kde.konsolai /Claude

# Send a prompt
qdbus org.kde.konsolai /Claude sendPrompt "Fix the build errors"
</programlisting>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 10 — Troubleshooting                                             -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="troubleshooting">
<title>Troubleshooting</title>

<sect1 id="common-issues">
<title>Common Issues</title>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>Claude session does not start</term>
<listitem>
<para>Verify that both <command>tmux</command> and <command>claude</command>
are in your <envar>PATH</envar>:</para>
<programlisting>
which tmux
which claude
</programlisting>
<para>Also check that Claude Code is authenticated by running
<command>claude</command> directly in a terminal.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Hooks not working (yolo mode falls back to polling)</term>
<listitem>
<para>Check for stale socket files:</para>
<programlisting>ls -la ~/.local/share/konsolai/sessions/*.sock</programlisting>
<para>Remove any sockets without a corresponding running session.  Also
verify that <command>konsolai-hook-handler</command> is in your
<envar>PATH</envar>.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Tab indicator stays gray</term>
<listitem>
<para>The Claude process may have failed to start.  Check the terminal
output for error messages.  Also check system logs:</para>
<programlisting>journalctl --user --since "10 minutes ago" | grep konsolai</programlisting>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Permission prompts not auto-approved in yolo mode</term>
<listitem>
<para>Verify the <filename>.yolo</filename> marker file exists:</para>
<programlisting>ls ~/.local/share/konsolai/sessions/*.yolo</programlisting>
<para>If hooks are failing, the polling fallback (300 ms) should still
work.  Check that the terminal prompt pattern has not changed
(Claude CLI updates may alter the TUI).</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>Orphaned tmux sessions accumulating</term>
<listitem>
<para>Use <menuchoice><guimenu>Claude</guimenu><guimenuitem>Archive
All</guimenuitem></menuchoice> to clean up, or manually:</para>
<programlisting>tmux ls | grep konsolai</programlisting>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="debugging">
<title>Debugging</title>

<para>For deeper debugging:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Runtime logs</emphasis> &mdash;
<command>journalctl --user --since "10 minutes ago" | grep
konsolai</command></para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Verify installed binary</emphasis> &mdash; Use
<command>strings</command> on the installed
<filename>libkonsoleprivate.so</filename> to confirm your build is
deployed.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Remote sessions</emphasis> &mdash; SSH directly
to the remote host to verify environment (PATH, tool availability, tmux
sessions).</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect1>

</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- CHAPTER 11 — Credits                                                     -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<chapter id="credits">
<title>Credits and Copyright</title>

<para>&konsolai; is developed by Struktured Labs, built on &konsole; by the
KDE community.</para>

<para>&konsole; is maintained by &Kurt.Hindenburg; &Kurt.Hindenburg.mail;.
Previous maintainers include &Robert.Knight; &Robert.Knight.mail; and
&Waldo.Bastian; &Waldo.Bastian.mail;.</para>

<para>The application &konsole; Copyright &copy; 1997-2008
&Lars.Doelle; &Lars.Doelle.mail;</para>

<para>&konsolai; Copyright &copy; 2025-2026 Struktured Labs</para>

<para>The original &konsole; handbook was written by &Jonathan.Singer;
&Jonathan.Singer.mail; and updated by &Kurt.Hindenburg;
&Kurt.Hindenburg.mail;.  The &konsolai; handbook was rewritten for
&konsolai; 1.0.</para>

<!-- TRANS:CREDIT_FOR_TRANSLATORS -->

&underFDL;
&underGPL;
</chapter>

<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<!-- Appendix — Links                                                         -->
<!-- ======================================================================== -->
<appendix id="links">
<title>Links</title>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><ulink url="https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code">Claude Code Documentation</ulink></para></listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="https://konsole.kde.org/">&konsole; Homepage</ulink></para></listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="https://userbase.kde.org/Konsole">&konsole; on KDE UserBase</ulink></para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

</appendix>

&documentation.index;

</book>
